NOTES.md, before:

# SmallWorld internals

This document is a collection of notes on the inner workings of the system
gleaned by porting the Java SmallWorld implementation to JavaScript.

## Core objects

In Smalltalk, everything you can access is an object, and every object has a
class. This is represented by the `SmallObject` representation of a Smalltalk
object. It contains `objClass`, the class of the object. This is a reference to
another `SmallObject`, the one representing a class. It also contains `data`,
the object's instance variables. This is represented as a JavaScript array, each
item of which is a `SmallObject` or subclass. For named instance variables, the
compiler assigns an index to each instance variable, and they're referenced that
way. Smalltalk also has an `Array` class which is an arbitrary sized collection
of objects. `Array` (conveniently) doesn't have named instance variables, so the
underlying JavaScript array, which can be any size, can represent the variable
contents of the array.

This object would probably be sufficient for implementation, but there are two
subclasses for convenience. `SmallByteArray` has a `values` property, which is
stored as a `Uint8Array`. This class is used for efficient storage of strings
and of bytecode, so a native compact representation is desirable. `SmallInt`
represents an integer value. Primitive types like integers are also objects in
Smalltalk. Internally, the system keeps a cache of commonly used small integers
(0 through 9). `SmallInt` has a `value` property (a JavaScript number) for
convenience (since the interpreter needs to use and manipulate integers often).
Although JavaScript lacks an integer number type, the number class should be
sufficient for the usage within the system, since it is always less than 32 bits
of precision. However, care should be taken to ensure that `value` is always an
integer.

## The Object File Format

The Smalltalk system is a complicated, circular graph of interrelated objects.
Serialization thus poses a problem because of all the circular dependencies.
Originally, SmallWorld used Java object serialization to accomplish this, but
the Java serialization format does not guarantee indefinite portability.

For this reason, I replaced the Java serialization in the SmallWorld
implementation with a custom one, written in pure Java, that could be used to
accomplish the same task. This proved to be valuable because porting it to
JavaScript was relatively straightforward. The `ImageReader` class treats the
input file as a stream of bytes (with integers stored in 32 bit big endian form,
to match Java's `DataInputStream`. The format is simple, where the file stores a
magic number, a version number (0), a count of all of the objects, and then the
`count` bytes, one for each object in the file. This determines the object's
type (0 = SmallObject, 1 = SmallInt, 2 = SmallByteArray). After this metadata,
each object is visited a second time, first reading an integer. The integer
corresponds to the entry in the object pool (which is why the objects were
preallocated and counted in the first place.) This helps keep the reference
semantics (objects in Smalltalk only store references to other objects) without
elaborate circular dependencies. Thus, when we read an integer N at the
beginning of the object, it is assumed that `objectPool[n]` is the SmallObject
representing the object's class. This scheme is used whenever an object is
referenced. After the class, it reads `dataLength`, the number of objects in the
SmallObject `data` array. This means that `dataLangth` integers will follow,
each one (like before) a reference to an object in the file's object pool.
Finally, there is some custom handling for reading the custom types SmallInt
(which needs its integer value) and SmallByteArray (which has an integer length,
and then the bytes that make up the array).

## Key objects

The interpreter relies heavily on the Smalltalk definition of several key
objects, including `Class`, `Method`, and `Context`. This is because much of
what the interpreter needs to do is send messages to objects. An object's class
has that object's methods, the method object has the bytecodes needed to run
that method, and the `Context` object represents a single frame in the call
stack. The ability for Smalltalk to inspect and manipulate these objects is what
gives it it's distinct dynamic nature. However, the interpreter (for
simplicity's sake) makes assumptions about the definitions of these objects,
because it needs to reference pieces of them in order to function.

From the Smalltalk source code, `Class` has the following definition:

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Object subclass: 'Class'
         variables: 'name parentClass methods size variables '
         classVariables: 'classes Parser ')
```

Of particular importance is `methods` which is an array of methods. Since an
array is just an arbitrary sized JavaScript array, if you are looking at an
object o in JavaScript, then `o.objClass.data[2]` are all the methods in that
class.

From the Smalltalk source code, `Method` has the following definition:

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Object subclass: 'Method'
         variables: 'name byteCodes literals stackSize temporarySize class text '
         classVariables: '')
```

Here, `name` is a String (a Symbol really, but SmallWorld doesn't distinguish
between Symbols and Strings), and `byteCodes` is a SmallByteArray used in
virtual machine execution. For example, the JavaScript code needs to iterate
through the methods to find the method called `doIt`, so it then has a handle on
the method object.

When a Method is called, the interpreter creates a new `Context` object that
represents the invocation of that method. This is analogous to a stack frame in
other languages. From the Smalltalk source code, `Context` has the following
definition:

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Object subclass: 'Context'
         variables: 'method arguments temporaries stack bytePointer
                     stackTop previousContext '
         classVariables: '')
```

The `buildContext` method in the `Interpreter` JavaScript class builds these
objects. The interpreter's job is to build and then run methods in a context.

## The Interpreter

The main job of `Interpreter` is to run bytecode. The Smalltalk virtual machine
is a stack machine, with intermediate values stored on a stack in the context.
The bytecodes themselves are one or two bytes, where the opcode (`high`) is four
bits, and the operand (low) is 4 or 8 bits. For example, the sequence `41` hex
has high = 4 and low = 1. The sequence `03 21` hex sets high = 3 and low = 0x21.

This yields 15 possible opcodes:

- 0 - Unused (invalid)
- 1 - PushInstance (push an instance variable of the receiver on the stack,
  indexed by low)
- 2 - PushArgument (push one of the method's arguments on the stack, indexed by
  low)
- 3 - PushTemporary (push one of the method's local, aka temporary variables on
  the stack, indexed by low)
- 4 - PushLiteral (push one of the method's constants, or literals, on the
  stack, indexed by low)
- 5 - PushConstant (push special constant objects like the SmallInts 0-9, `nil`,
  `true`, or `false`
- 6 - AssignInstance (set one of the receiver's instance variables to the top of
  the stack)
- 7 - AssignTemporary (set one of the method's temporary variables to the top of
  the stack)
- 8 - MarkArguments (put arguments into an array)
- 9 - SendMessage (Send a message to an object)
- 10 - SendUnary (Send a unary message to an object)
- 11 - SendBinary (Send a binary message to the top two objects on the stack,
  optimized for things like integer arithmetic)
- 12 - PushBlock (push a reference to a block)
- 13 - DoPrimitive (do something special. low is the arg count, the following
  byte is the number of the primitive)
- 14 - PushClassVariable (push one of the variables owned by the receiver's
  class)
- 15 - DoSpecial (these are auxiliary instructions that didn't fit above, such
  as returning from a context)

Block is a special object which is a subset of bytecode within a compiled
method. Blocks are special because they are executable - sending the `value`
message to a block evaluates it. From the Smalltalk source code, `Block` has the
following definition.

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Context subclass: 'Block'
          variables: 'argumentLocation creatingContext oldBytePointer '
          classVariables: '')
```

Note that block thus has the 7 instance variables of context, plus 3 new ones.

Putting it all together, here is a sample method added to `String`:

```
asUpper | r |
  r <- String new: self size.
  1 to: self size do: [:i |
    r at: i put: (self at: i) upperCase].
  ^r
```

which demonstrates features like blocks. Here is a hand annotated disassembly of
the bytecode associated with that block:

bytecode

`#(64 32 129 145 130 146 112 245 81 32 129 147 193 25 48 49 32 49 130 148 129 149 131 150 242 131 151 245 48 242 245 241 )`

literals

`#(String size new: size at: upperCase at:put: to:do: )`

Disassembly:

```
PC  Bytecode   Opcode             Comment
 0: 64 (40)    PushLiteral 0      (String)
 1: 32 (20)    PushArgument 0     (self)
 2: 129 (81)   MarkArguments 1    (the 1 arg TOS self is marked)
 3: 145 (91)   SendMessage 1      (size, which will leave "self size" on the stack)
 4: 130 (82)   MarkArguments 2    (String which was on the stack, and "self size")
 5: 146 (92)   SendMessage 2      (new: which evaluates "String new: self size")
 6: 112 (70)   AssignTemporary 0  (assign to "r", leaves value on stack)
 7: 245 (f5)   DoSpeical 5        (pop TOS, what was assigned to r)
 8; 81 (51),   PushConstant 1     (push smallint 1 on stack)
 9: 32 (20)    PushArgument 0     (self)
10: 129 (81)   MarkArguments 1    (self)
11: 147 (93)   SendMessage 3      (#size, calling self size)
12: 193 (c1)   PushBlock 1        (the arg is at temp pos 1)
13: 25 (19)                       (goto value for block) so execution jumps to 25
               Contents of block
14: 48 (30)    PushTemporary 0    (r from method)
15: 49 (31)    PushTemporary 1    (i, the block arg)
16: 32 (20)    PushArgument 0     (self, the string)
17: 49 (31)    PushTemporary 1    (i)
18: 130 (82)   MarkArguments 2    (for self and i)
19: 148 (94)   SendMessage 4      (at:)
20: 129 (81)   MarkArguments 1    (char from at: above)
21: 149 (95)   SendMessage 5      (send upperCase)
22: 131 (83)   MarkArgumen 3      (r, i, char)
23: 150 (96)   SendMessage 6      (send at:put:)
24: 242 (f2)   Special 2          (stack return, block done)
               After the block
25: 131 (83)   MarkArguments 3    (args for to:do:, 1, self size, and block)
26: 151 (97)   SendMessage 7      (to:do:)
27: 245 (f5)   DoSpecial 5        (pop TOS, which is whatever to:do: returned)
28: 48 (30)    PushTemporary 0    (r)
29: 242 (f2)   DoSpecial 2        (stack return, which returns r)
30: 245 (f5)   DpSpecial 5        (unrechable? pops TOS)
31: 241 (f1)   DoSpecial 1        (unreachable? self return)
```

This covers many, but not all of the features of the bytecode. The interpreter
source itself is the canonical source of truth.

## The GUI

Smallworld's GUI provides a Smalltalk programming environment. You can add and
remove classes, edit existing class methods, add methods, evaluate expressions,
inspect live object, and so on.

The GUI has a significant number of primitives for manipulating the GUI objects,
becahse the host system (originally Java) provided all of the graphical
primitives. The way the Smalltalk code interacts with these primitives is
interesting. A good example of this is the `Pane (class)>>#textArea`:

```
META Pane
textArea  " create a multi-line text area"
   ^ <73 self>
```

So, when primitive 73 is called, it is passed an argument, the Pane class (note
that because this is a META (class) method, `self` here is `Pane`). It is then
expected for the primitive to return a new object, whose class is Pane, which
represents the newly created object. It creates a new Smalltalk Object, whose
class is Pane, and which (interally) has a reference to the platform specific
object, not directly exposed to the Smalltalk code.

When invoking methods, those object's are refenced. In `Pane>>#setText:`

```
METHOD Pane
setText: s " set text in text pane "
   ^ <82 self s>
```

Primitive 82 is passed two arguments, `s` (the string to display) and `self`,
which in the case is the _instance_ of a Pane created above. The primitive thus
assumes that self has a native object peer (a multi line text display) and
invokes code to change the text in that text display. In practice, the object
peer can be anything, but in the Java and JavaScript implementations, it is a
native (JavaScript) object that represents the TextArea.

Smallworld's paradigms belie it's roots as a Java AWT application. It uses
concepts such as AWT's `BorderLayout` and `GridLayout`, as well as the event
listener mechiansms.

Event handling in Smalltalk is handled with blocks. A block is evaluated when a
button is pushed, for example. To accomplish this, a reference to the block is
stored in the native object's event handler. When the native code runs it's
event handler, it invokes code in `ui_handler.js`, which in turn calls
`interpreter.runAction(action)`, which effectivly creates a new context from the
block and executes it.

Commit message:

Add support for floating point arithmetic

NOTES.md, after:

# SmallWorld internals

This document is a collection of notes on the inner workings of the system
gleaned by porting the Java SmallWorld implementation to JavaScript.

## Core objects

In Smalltalk, everything you can access is an object, and every object has a
class. This is represented by the `SmallObject` representation of a Smalltalk
object. It contains `objClass`, the class of the object. This is a reference to
another `SmallObject`, the one representing a class. It also contains `data`,
the object's instance variables. This is represented as a JavaScript array, each
item of which is a `SmallObject` or subclass. For named instance variables, the
compiler assigns an index to each instance variable, and they're referenced that
way. Smalltalk also has an `Array` class which is an arbitrary sized collection
of objects. `Array` (conveniently) doesn't have named instance variables, so the
underlying JavaScript array, which can be any size, can represent the variable
contents of the array.

This object would probably be sufficient for implementation, but there are two
subclasses for convenience. `SmallByteArray` has a `values` property, which is
stored as a `Uint8Array`. This class is used for efficient storage of strings
and of bytecode, so a native compact representation is desirable. `SmallInt`
represents an integer value. Primitive types like integers are also objects in
Smalltalk. Internally, the system keeps a cache of commonly used small integers
(0 through 9). `SmallInt` has a `value` property (a JavaScript number) for
convenience (since the interpreter needs to use and manipulate integers often).
Although JavaScript lacks an integer number type, the number class should be
sufficient for the usage within the system, since it is always less than 32 bits
of precision. However, care should be taken to ensure that `value` is always an
integer.

There is an additional, optional subclass of `SmallObject` called
`SmallJsObject`. This object represents something whose primary representation
exists outside of the Smalltalk object system. For example, GUI objects like a
Text entry widget are represented in HTML as a `<textarea>` element. When doing
floating point arithmetic, The number is opaque to Smalltalk, and relies on
JavaScript to do the floating point operations. Thus any time can be placed in
the `nativeObject` property of a `SmallJsObject`, and the appropriate primitives
manipulate it. This is optional because the compiler and interpreter can work
without requiring an arbitrary native object type.

## The Object File Format

The Smalltalk system is a complicated, circular graph of interrelated objects.
Serialization thus poses a problem because of all the circular dependencies.
Originally, SmallWorld used Java object serialization to accomplish this, but
the Java serialization format does not guarantee indefinite portability.

For this reason, I replaced the Java serialization in the SmallWorld
implementation with a custom one, written in pure Java, that could be used to
accomplish the same task. This proved to be valuable because porting it to
JavaScript was relatively straightforward. The `ImageReader` class treats the
input file as a stream of bytes (with integers stored in 32 bit big endian form,
to match Java's `DataInputStream`. The format is simple, where the file stores a
magic number, a version number (0), a count of all of the objects, and then the
`count` bytes, one for each object in the file. This determines the object's
type (0 = SmallObject, 1 = SmallInt, 2 = SmallByteArray). After this metadata,
each object is visited a second time, first reading an integer. The integer
corresponds to the entry in the object pool (which is why the objects were
preallocated and counted in the first place.) This helps keep the reference
semantics (objects in Smalltalk only store references to other objects) without
elaborate circular dependencies. Thus, when we read an integer N at the
beginning of the object, it is assumed that `objectPool[n]` is the SmallObject
representing the object's class. This scheme is used whenever an object is
referenced. After the class, it reads `dataLength`, the number of objects in the
SmallObject `data` array. This means that `dataLangth` integers will follow,
each one (like before) a reference to an object in the file's object pool.
Finally, there is some custom handling for reading the custom types SmallInt
(which needs its integer value) and SmallByteArray (which has an integer length,
and then the bytes that make up the array).

## Key objects

The interpreter relies heavily on the Smalltalk definition of several key
objects, including `Class`, `Method`, and `Context`. This is because much of
what the interpreter needs to do is send messages to objects. An object's class
has that object's methods, the method object has the bytecodes needed to run
that method, and the `Context` object represents a single frame in the call
stack. The ability for Smalltalk to inspect and manipulate these objects is what
gives it it's distinct dynamic nature. However, the interpreter (for
simplicity's sake) makes assumptions about the definitions of these objects,
because it needs to reference pieces of them in order to function.

From the Smalltalk source code, `Class` has the following definition:

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Object subclass: 'Class'
         variables: 'name parentClass methods size variables '
         classVariables: 'classes Parser ')
```

Of particular importance is `methods` which is an array of methods. Since an
array is just an arbitrary sized JavaScript array, if you are looking at an
object o in JavaScript, then `o.objClass.data[2]` are all the methods in that
class.

From the Smalltalk source code, `Method` has the following definition:

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Object subclass: 'Method'
         variables: 'name byteCodes literals stackSize temporarySize class text '
         classVariables: '')
```

Here, `name` is a String (a Symbol really, but SmallWorld doesn't distinguish
between Symbols and Strings), and `byteCodes` is a SmallByteArray used in
virtual machine execution. For example, the JavaScript code needs to iterate
through the methods to find the method called `doIt`, so it then has a handle on
the method object.

When a Method is called, the interpreter creates a new `Context` object that
represents the invocation of that method. This is analogous to a stack frame in
other languages. From the Smalltalk source code, `Context` has the following
definition:

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Object subclass: 'Context'
         variables: 'method arguments temporaries stack bytePointer
                     stackTop previousContext '
         classVariables: '')
```

The `buildContext` method in the `Interpreter` JavaScript class builds these
objects. The interpreter's job is to build and then run methods in a context.

## The Interpreter

The main job of `Interpreter` is to run bytecode. The Smalltalk virtual machine
is a stack machine, with intermediate values stored on a stack in the context.
The bytecodes themselves are one or two bytes, where the opcode (`high`) is four
bits, and the operand (low) is 4 or 8 bits. For example, the sequence `41` hex
has high = 4 and low = 1. The sequence `03 21` hex sets high = 3 and low = 0x21.

This yields 15 possible opcodes:

- 0 - Unused (invalid)
- 1 - PushInstance (push an instance variable of the receiver on the stack,
  indexed by low)
- 2 - PushArgument (push one of the method's arguments on the stack, indexed by
  low)
- 3 - PushTemporary (push one of the method's local, aka temporary variables on
  the stack, indexed by low)
- 4 - PushLiteral (push one of the method's constants, or literals, on the
  stack, indexed by low)
- 5 - PushConstant (push special constant objects like the SmallInts 0-9, `nil`,
  `true`, or `false`
- 6 - AssignInstance (set one of the receiver's instance variables to the top of
  the stack)
- 7 - AssignTemporary (set one of the method's temporary variables to the top of
  the stack)
- 8 - MarkArguments (put arguments into an array)
- 9 - SendMessage (Send a message to an object)
- 10 - SendUnary (Send a unary message to an object)
- 11 - SendBinary (Send a binary message to the top two objects on the stack,
  optimized for things like integer arithmetic)
- 12 - PushBlock (push a reference to a block)
- 13 - DoPrimitive (do something special. low is the arg count, the following
  byte is the number of the primitive)
- 14 - PushClassVariable (push one of the variables owned by the receiver's
  class)
- 15 - DoSpecial (these are auxiliary instructions that didn't fit above, such
  as returning from a context)

Block is a special object which is a subset of bytecode within a compiled
method. Blocks are special because they are executable - sending the `value`
message to a block evaluates it. From the Smalltalk source code, `Block` has the
following definition.

```
EVAL Class addNewClass: (
  Context subclass: 'Block'
          variables: 'argumentLocation creatingContext oldBytePointer '
          classVariables: '')
```

Note that block thus has the 7 instance variables of context, plus 3 new ones.

Putting it all together, here is a sample method added to `String`:

```
asUpper | r |
  r <- String new: self size.
  1 to: self size do: [:i |
    r at: i put: (self at: i) upperCase].
  ^r
```

which demonstrates features like blocks. Here is a hand annotated disassembly of
the bytecode associated with that block:

bytecode

`#(64 32 129 145 130 146 112 245 81 32 129 147 193 25 48 49 32 49 130 148 129 149 131 150 242 131 151 245 48 242 245 241 )`

literals

`#(String size new: size at: upperCase at:put: to:do: )`

Disassembly:

```
PC  Bytecode   Opcode             Comment
 0: 64 (40)    PushLiteral 0      (String)
 1: 32 (20)    PushArgument 0     (self)
 2: 129 (81)   MarkArguments 1    (the 1 arg TOS self is marked)
 3: 145 (91)   SendMessage 1      (size, which will leave "self size" on the stack)
 4: 130 (82)   MarkArguments 2    (String which was on the stack, and "self size")
 5: 146 (92)   SendMessage 2      (new: which evaluates "String new: self size")
 6: 112 (70)   AssignTemporary 0  (assign to "r", leaves value on stack)
 7: 245 (f5)   DoSpeical 5        (pop TOS, what was assigned to r)
 8; 81 (51),   PushConstant 1     (push smallint 1 on stack)
 9: 32 (20)    PushArgument 0     (self)
10: 129 (81)   MarkArguments 1    (self)
11: 147 (93)   SendMessage 3      (#size, calling self size)
12: 193 (c1)   PushBlock 1        (the arg is at temp pos 1)
13: 25 (19)                       (goto value for block) so execution jumps to 25
               Contents of block
14: 48 (30)    PushTemporary 0    (r from method)
15: 49 (31)    PushTemporary 1    (i, the block arg)
16: 32 (20)    PushArgument 0     (self, the string)
17: 49 (31)    PushTemporary 1    (i)
18: 130 (82)   MarkArguments 2    (for self and i)
19: 148 (94)   SendMessage 4      (at:)
20: 129 (81)   MarkArguments 1    (char from at: above)
21: 149 (95)   SendMessage 5      (send upperCase)
22: 131 (83)   MarkArgumen 3      (r, i, char)
23: 150 (96)   SendMessage 6      (send at:put:)
24: 242 (f2)   Special 2          (stack return, block done)
               After the block
25: 131 (83)   MarkArguments 3    (args for to:do:, 1, self size, and block)
26: 151 (97)   SendMessage 7      (to:do:)
27: 245 (f5)   DoSpecial 5        (pop TOS, which is whatever to:do: returned)
28: 48 (30)    PushTemporary 0    (r)
29: 242 (f2)   DoSpecial 2        (stack return, which returns r)
30: 245 (f5)   DpSpecial 5        (unrechable? pops TOS)
31: 241 (f1)   DoSpecial 1        (unreachable? self return)
```

This covers many, but not all of the features of the bytecode. The interpreter
source itself is the canonical source of truth.

## The GUI

Smallworld's GUI provides a Smalltalk programming environment. You can add and
remove classes, edit existing class methods, add methods, evaluate expressions,
inspect live object, and so on.

The GUI has a significant number of primitives for manipulating the GUI objects,
because the host system (originally Java) provided all of the graphical
primitives. The way the Smalltalk code interacts with these primitives is
interesting. A good example of this is the `Pane (class)>>#textArea`:

```
META Pane
textArea  " create a multi-line text area"
   ^ <73 self>
```

So, when primitive 73 is called, it is passed an argument, the Pane class (note
that because this is a META (class) method, `self` here is `Pane`). It is then
expected for the primitive to return a new object, whose class is Pane, which
represents the newly created object. It creates a new Smalltalk Object, whose
class is Pane, and which (internally) has a reference to the platform specific
object, not directly exposed to the Smalltalk code.

When invoking methods, those object's are referenced. In `Pane>>#setText:`

```
METHOD Pane
setText: s " set text in text pane "
   ^ <82 self s>
```

Primitive 82 is passed two arguments, `s` (the string to display) and `self`,
which in the case is the _instance_ of a Pane created above. The primitive thus
assumes that self has a native object peer (a multi line text display) and
invokes code to change the text in that text display. In practice, the object
peer can be anything, but in the Java and JavaScript implementations, it is a
native (JavaScript) object that represents the TextArea.

Smallworld's paradigms belie it's roots as a Java AWT application. It uses
concepts such as AWT's `BorderLayout` and `GridLayout`, as well as the event
listener mechanisms.

Event handling in Smalltalk is handled with blocks. A block is evaluated when a
button is pushed, for example. To accomplish this, a reference to the block is
stored in the native object's event handler. When the native code runs it's
event handler, it invokes code in `ui_handler.js`, which in turn calls
`interpreter.runAction(action)`, which effectively creates a new context from
the block and executes it.
